[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in
today's video we're going to look at this
concept of complexity of natural numbers and
in fact we're going to look at a couple of
different versions of complexity one Associated
to exponential operation the other Associated to
triangular operation sort of One Step Up and what
I want to slowly move towards is this idea that
the natural numbers are a lot more complicated
than we think they are and that doing arithmetic
especially with bigger and bigger numbers starts
to look very different from doing arithmetic with
the usual relatively small numbers that
we're mostly concerned with in everyday
life so this is a bit sobering and it's maybe
a little bit disorienting as well some of the
insights that we're going to gain by thinking
about this concept of complexity okay so the first
concept is that of exponential complexity and we
Define that to be the minimum number of symbols
used in a meaningful arithmetical expression
that evaluates to a number n so N is a natural
number and its exponential complexity is the
minimum number required to have an arithmetical
uh expression that evaluates to end wherever
only using the following symbols the digits 0 1
2 up to 9 together with addition multiplication
exponentiation and a left and right bracket and
we're obliged to write a arithmetical expression
as a sequence of symbols a string of symbols which
have a u meaningful arithmetical content so for
example the exponential complexity of 14 is 2
because it takes two digits to write 14 1024 we
saw its complexity was three because we could
actually write it in the slightly more efficient
way here by using the exponential sign so 4
exponent 5 is another way of writing 1024 instead
of using four digits to express it we're using
three digits to express it so its complexity in
this framework is three how about this somewhat
bigger number three 71 293 well it turns out that
its complexity is four because it happens to be
a perfect power it's 13 exponent 5 or 13 to the 5
now if we're not that familiar with our exponents
we wouldn't perhaps guess that this particular
number is an exponent of this kind rather special
kind of number so the usual guess that we would
suppose is that this is probably of complexity six
because we generally feel that typically most
numbers are going to have complexity the same
number of digits that are used to express them
that's at least only an intuition we want to
make that a little bit more precise and we will
make that more precise in our next video okay
what about this number here 697 356 8807 well you
might think that its complexity is 3 6 9 10 but
it's complex is probably 8 because we can write
it this way as 2 * 3 exponent 20 + 5 and we're
using the convention here that exponentiation
has precedence over multiplication so this is
an unambiguous statement which means that you
take 3 to the 20 and then you multiply that
by two and then finally you add five so here we
need 1 2 3 4 5 6 78 symbols and my guess is that
that's probably the minimum required but actually
I'm not entirely sure about that so we'll leave a
question mark over that probably the complexity of
this number is eight but it would actually involve
some more work to verify that there wasn't some
more efficient way of writing it say involving
some other power now I'd also like to consider a
slightly more sophisticated a notion of complexity
which we're going to call triangular complexity
and that's the complexity that we're going to be
mainly interested in for the rest of this video so
what is triangular complexity well it's the same
kind of thing where we're taking a natural number
n and we're looking at the minimum length of an
arithmetical expression for n where now we're
using this symbol set which includes in addition
the triangle operation so they're allog together
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 symbols in the collection
of allowed symbols and I remind you about the
triangle operation this a hyper operation which
has this form that M triangle n is m to the
m to the m all the way up to the m so a tower
of M's each exponentiating the previous where
there are n in the tower there are nm's in this
Tower so using this operation we can of course
create much bigger numbers much more efficiently
than we can just with addition multiplication
and exponentiation so including this thing
here will have a dramatic impact as we go
to bigger numbers but for relatively small
numbers like you know less than a billion
or trillion or so it's not going to have a
significant effect on complexity but for us
complexity will mean triangular complexity
we want to go a little bit in this direction
of including some of these hyper operations
and we're going to include this triangle
one which is also star three in my list
of higher multiplications all right so a word
of warning here that this notion of complexity
this triangular complexity is in general quite
hard to calculate particularly if n is rather
big if n is very big then there are all kinds of
possibilities for using powers and combinations
of powers and combinations of exponentials and
triangles and just ordinary multiplications and
summons and so on to cook up in but for smaller
ends like let's say one to a billion or maybe
a trillion we'll see that this is not that hard
in general okay and so a tool for understanding
that is to have a little bit more of a sense of
what powers look like both exponential powers and
triangular Powers I'd like to spend a little bit
of time now with you having a look at some Powers
this is usually not done in mathematics usually
usually these things are sort of over the hill
and people are familiar with smallish Powers
but not much more than that and I think it's
really instructive to cast your eye over bigger
powers to get just at least a rough familiarity
with some of them maybe some of them will stick
in your minds and I think it's there's something
beneficial about having this concrete contact with
bigger numbers that's my opinion so I'm not asking
you to memorize these of course but I just want
you to have a look over them cast your eye over
them sort of read this all right so powers of
two well most of us are familiar with 2^ s is
four and then we have 8 to the 4th is 16 to the
5ifth is 32 to the 6th is 64 to the 7th 128 to
the eighth is 256 to the 9th is 512 and 2 the
10 is24 those are very important numbers that
come up in many different situations and then
higher powers of two are also important 2 to
the 11 is 248 2 to 12 is 4,096 to the 13 is
8,192 two the 14th is 16,384 and to the 15 is
32,768 okay I'm not going to read all of
these but let's have a look at say powers
of three so the powers of three go from 9
9 to 27 to 881 then 3 to the 5th is 243 3
to the 6th is 729 3 the 7th is 2,187 3
the e8th is 6,561 and then 19683 59049
17747 powers of four very closely connected
with powers of two of course 16 64 256
1024 496 16 384 65536 262144 uh 1 48576 that
one there powers of five 25 125 625 3,125
15,625 and then we see some higher
Powers so please have a look at each one of
those so powers of 6 6 s is 36 6
cubed is 216 6 4 1,296 6 to the 5th
7,776 and then 46,656 and then these higher
Powers also powers of 7 7 squ is 49 7 cubed
343 7 4th 2,41 1 7 to 5th 1687 and then you can
have a look at these subsequent ones powers of
8 8 squar is 64 8 cubed is 512 8 to 4th 4,096
8 to 5th 32,768 and there are some higher ones
and powers of 9 9 squ is 81 9 cubed is 729 9
to the 4th is 6561 9 5th 59,4 and some higher
ones fun isn't it and just to go a little
bit further some powers of 11 11^ 2 121
11 cubed 1,331 11 to 4th 14,641 11 to
5th 161 051 12 SAR is 144 12 cubed 1,7
28 12 to 4th 20736 12 5th 248 832 13 squared
169 13 cubed 2,196 13 to 4th 28561 13 to the
5th 371 293 14 SAR is 196 14 cubed is 2744
14 to the 4th is 38416 14 to 5th is 537 824
and as far as we'll go 15 squar is 225
15 cubed 3375 15 to 4 5,625 15 to 5th 759
375 so powers are interesting numbers they are
important numbers they are arithmetically very
compact ways of getting bigger sizes Fat's
Last Theorem of course intimately connected
with powers so forat SL theorem says that for
example if you take Nal 5 then x 5 + y 5 = Z 5
doesn't have any integer natural number Solutions
means that if we just look at sort of the list of
fifth powers that we can't find two of them on
the list that add to a third one on the list
so it's all about these special kinds of numbers
but now we're also going one step further in
this ladder of arithmetical operations to our
triangular kind of exponentiation or triangular
powers and so it's useful for us to have a
little look at some triangular Powers so I
remind you that M triangle N means m to the
m to the m all all the way up to the m total
number of n in the tower that's what m triangle
N means so 2 triangle 2 would mean 2 to the 2
which is four 2 triangle 3 would mean 2
to the 2 to the 2 which is 16 2 triangle
4 is 2 to the 2 to the 2 to the 2 which is
2 to the previous one 2 to the 16 which is
65,536 what about the next one two triangle 5 well
at each stage we are taking two to the
previous one so this would be 2 to the
65,536 this is getting to be a biggest
number it's not so big that my computer
can't calculate it in fact my computer
calculates it spits it out in no less
than a second and there are about 19,000 more
digits between the first couple of digits which
are 2 0 0 35 29 then there's about 19,000
more of them and then the last few digits
are 1 5 6 736 so this is a very big number
but nevertheless my computer can spit it out
very quickly we can still do arithmetic at the
level of these numbers but it's getting pretty
big if we wanted to go to the next one two
triangle 6 well then we would have to take
two to this power and then we would be far beyond
what our computer can do so two triangle 5 yes we
can write that down two triangle six we cannot
write it down explicitly in Hindu Arabic form
how about 3 triangle 2 well that's 3 to the 3
which is 27 3 triangle 3 would be 3 to the 27
and that's this number here 765 597
484987 so that's uh 100s thousands
millions billions so 765 billion 597 milon
484987 and then the next one would be
three triangle 4 that would be three
to this number and that again would be
too big for us to um contemplate not
as big as two to this number but still
bigger than we would want to uh to deal
with okay uh what about fours four
triangle 2 is 4 4 which is 256 4
triangle 3 is 4 to 4 to 4 which is
reasonably big number it's starts
1 3 407 and then there are 144 more
digits and and then we end up with 084
096 so these triangular kind of exponents
or triangular Powers even for pretty small
values of m&n are pretty quickly big numbers
and pretty quickly as we jack up this second
sort of power uh they get beyond what
we're able to write down in our usual
Hindu Arabic form but we can still write
them down down in this triangular power
form and a few more so 5 triangle 2
is 5 to 5 that's 3,125 five triangle
3 which is 5 to the 5 to the 5 that's 1 911
followed by about 2100 digits followed by
20325 6 triangle 2 otherwise known as 6 to the 6
is 46,656 7 triangle 2 7 to the 7 is 8 23 5 43 8
triangle 2 is 16777216 9 triangle 2 is 387 420
489 and 10 triangle 2 is 10 10 or 10 billion 10
triangle 3 would be 10 to the 10 billion or 10 to
the 10 to the 10 10 triangle 4 would be 10 to the
10 to the 10 to the 10 and so on so by looking at
this list of triangular Powers we see that with
the exception of two triangle 4 which is 2 the
16 that's 65,536 triangle powers do generally not
affect complexity over exponential complexity for
numbers which are reasonably small say less than
10 10 in other words the advantage that you get
by allowing yourself triangular Powers as well as
exponential powers does really reduce complexity
at all for almost all numbers less than 10 billion
because something like six triangle two can also
be written as 6 to the 6 or just six exponent six
so in each case there's a complexity of three so
you're not gaining anything here you are gaining
something to Triangle 4 that's complexity of three
in our triangular complexity system while it would
be complexity four in an exponential system okay
so for relatively small numbers there's not much
difference between exponential complexity
and triangular complexity but for larger
numbers the effect is quite dramatic we're able to
express compactly bigger numbers dramatically more
efficiently if we allow ourselves the triangle
hyper operator along with exponentiation now I
think most people's intu is that the complexity
of a natural number should be reasonably close
to the number of digits of n at least most of the
time certainly we can State this proposition which
is immediately obvious that the complexity of n
is certainly less than or equal to the number of
digits of n if the number of digits is 20 then the
complexity is at most 20 because we can certainly
write it using 20 digits you might be able to
write it more efficiently but certainly we're
not going to require more than 20 digits so this
is obvious the complexity of a natural number is
less than or equal to the number of digits of N
and something else that's also very easy to see is
that there's a connection between the complexity
of a natural number n and the complexity of the
next natural number n Plus 1 the complexity of
n + 1 is less than or equal to the complexity
of n + 2 so if the complexity of some number N
is a th then the complexity of n + 1 is at most
1,2 and the proof is reasonably straightforward
if n can be written as an arithmetical expression
involving the K symbols say S1 S2 up to SK so
that's some arithmetical expression involving our
various symbols digits operators brackets then an
arithmetical expression for n+ one can be obtained
just by taking the expression for n and adding the
symbol + one so that's an arithmetical expression
for n then this will be an arithmetical expression
for n + 1 and this has two more symbols than this
one does so the maximum increase going from n
to n + 1 is 2 now it might be that going from
n to n plus1 actually decreases the complexity
quite dramatically because it might be that n+
one is a a perfect power so then the complexity
would go down quite a lot so the lesson is that
complexity increases slowly as we move through the
natural numbers one at a time the complexity can
go up by at most two every time it never shoots
up dramatically but it can drop dramatically
very quickly so it's upward movement and its
downward movement are dramatically different
so here's a pretty interesting challenge for
the computer programmers amongst you it's an
exercise to write a program that computes this
triangular complexity C of n for n a natural
number so write a program that say give given
natural number in the range 1 to 10 billion
will crank out its complexity of course there is
a Brute Force program there's a simple-minded way
which of course is very inefficient given a
natural number n with say k digits one way of
determining its complexity is just to basically
list all possible arithmetical expressions
starting with the smallest ones possible and
evaluate them all see if any of them happen to
evaluate to n so you start with expressions of
size one okay you list all of them see if any
of them are equal to n if none of them are you
go to the expressions of size two evaluate all
of them see if any of them are equal to n if not
go to three Etc at each stage there's only six
possibilities for each symbol so there's a finite
number of possibilities so there's a finite amount
of work but of course quite a lot of work um So
eventually you will either get to the K digits
itself or you will find a shorter arithmetical
expression which gives you the complexity but
that's not the program you want to write of course
you want to write something that's clever that
uses the existing understanding of powers so
for example but let's give ourselves this task
suppose that we have this number here all right
so this is 16,781 1922 we're interested in what
is its complexity so our first guess might be
well 1 2 3 4 5 6 78 maybe its complexity is8
we know certainly its complexity is at most eight
so a good place to start would be to factor this
number if we Factor it we find it's 2 5th * 7 *
74932 that's a prime that's not much help to us
this is not close to being a pure power so we
can't immediately write down some more compact
expression for it as a product of things or
as a product of powers but what we could do
is we could look through our list of powers
like the ones I showed you on the previous
pages and look through those things and see if
we can find some combinations of them that give
this thing here since this is a complexity
of eight it means that the combinations that
we're looking for have to be relatively small
basically we have to look for something of the
form one power plus another power in fact we
can find such a thing so it turns out because I
chose it that way that this uh n is actually
8 to the 8 + 6 to 5th and when we write it
this way which is a valid arithmetical expression
we see that its complexity here is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Which is less than eight and then I think if you
look further at Powers you will likely find that
you can't express this in a more efficient way
so I'm claiming that uh CN is equal to 7 but
I have to admit that I haven't actually looked
at all the possibilities because there are more
possible powers that one could look at beside the
ones that uh that I've looked at for example it
might be that this thing here could be maybe 34
to the 9 plus 7 okay if it was that then that
would lower its complexity by one so I'm making
a little bit of a a guess here that that doesn't
happen but if you had a computer program maybe
someone can check for me see if my claim is right
that this thing actually has complexity 7 or
maybe I've just chosen a very unlucky number
and there's some more remarkable uh closeness with
a power that drops the complexity down to six so
let's ask the question what does this complexity
look like as a function of n if we want to draw
a graph of the values of the complexity charged
against n so let's suppose that we have a linear
scale here for n so there's 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
n blah blah blah all the way up to 10 billion
so arranged in this big horizontal stretch
here nicely uniformly spread out so 10 the
9 will be 1/10th of this will be down here and
then the complexities values go from one up to
10 and a number that's pretty big this is 10
billion so typical number in here it might be
5 billion 348 million blah blah so that will
typically have 10 digits and so we expect its
complexity most of the time to be 10 so in this
stream here there will be a lot of complexity 10
that's our intuition but every so often there will
be a complexity nine and sometimes a complexity
8 or complexity 7 and so on and the further
down we go the smaller the complexity that
we're looking for the fewer numbers we expect to
find with that complexity so in terms of bands
of Blackness this would be very dark band this
would be a somewhat lighter band and then this
would be a an even lighter band of black and so
as we keep going down here there would be fewer
and fewer uh points it would become grayer and
grayer more and more white as we go down so that
previous graph was really very special because
that 10 billion is in the large scheme of things
a relatively small number we're only looking at a
very very tiny part of this idea of complexity so
what happens if we zoom out somewhat say we go
out so that here we have not 10 to the 10 but
10 triangle 10 10 triangle 10 is much bigger than
10 10 I remind you that 10 triangle 10 is 10 10 to
the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to
the 10 to the 10 to the 10 and if we add 23 we get
that number Zed that I talked about occasionally
and so Zed will be just adjacent pretty well to
10 10 okay what does this complexity look like
now for this well a lot of things are quite um
disconcerting about this graph okay and there's
a lot to be learned about mathematics and number
Theory by thinking about this graph it's well
worth your contemplation of it even though we
don't know what it looks like precisely but even
the rough features are still very Illuminating
so first of all let's ask ourselves roughly
what are the complexity uh of most of these
numbers in here so we have a tower of 10 10
to the 10 to the 10 10 of them in this Tower
so okay roughly speaking if we uh if we want
to count how many digits such a thing has we
should take its log base 10 okay and roughly
speaking log base 10 although we don't need
to know precisely what this is is going
to peel off one of those towers of tens
so we're going to have roughly roughly 10
triangle 9 as the level of the complexity
so the level of the complexity although
it's much less than this is still from
our point of view very huge so that's a
big difference from the last picture the
last picture we had a relatively big number
here 10 billion but the complexity was only
10 here we have a super duper number and here's a
super number but this number is already very big
and so just to orient ourselves uh and this is
not a scale at all okay so I'm distorting scale
dramatically here let's put somewhere here the
number 10 triangle 4 10 to the 10 to the 10 to
the 10 that's a nice number for reasons we'll see
because it's kind of at the scale of the universe
in some sense I'll I'll be more precise about that
in the future video but roughly if we put a little
marker here to represent this number now this was
actually linear scale this number here this marker
would be so close to zero you wouldn't be able to
see it but let's put it a little bit further away
so we can see it and similarly we'll put the
similar marker on the vertical axis so there's
10 triangle 4 in that vertical axis as well now
what happens to the complexity of numbers well
when we're very have very small numbers and the
complexity is of course very small sort of ranging
around here and as the numbers get big well the
complexity starts getting big too and what's
going to happen is that okay it won't take long
before the the complexity of these numbers gets uh
big so there will be lots of sort of random little
Jiggles here which if you took a microscope and
looked at a little area you see lots of little
Jiggles going up and down in almost crazy way
but you know roughly uh for most of this range
you would have a complexity which was you know
roughly around this level whatever that is and
every so often there would be these dips some
of them be small dips and every so often a more
dramatic dip represented by some line that comes
down like this so a line that comes down like this
is telling us that you know at that point there we
have bumped into a number which is expressible in
triangular or uh exponential power notation much
more efficiently than the previous one it's like
bumping into a pure exponential power or a pure
triangular power okay so when we bump into one
of those then the complexity plummets down very
dramatically from the one to the next is a huge
drop and then after that it creeps up we've seen
that it only increases by two at most so going
from one to the next one there's only a range
of two up there so but because of the difference
in Scales here uh that still amounts to going up
in our picture rather dramatically okay so okay
so we would see these spikes and of course it
would be much more complicated than this um but
something something like this it has a kind of
fractal aspect perhaps one might say certainly
some kind of random aspect and it's very hard
for us to get a hold of things but what I want
to draw particularly to your attention okay is
that there's a little band down here okay I put a
band across at this 10 triangle 4 which is 10 10
the 10 the 10 and I'm claiming that this band
more or less corres responds with the visible
mathematical Universe what does that mean well
that means numbers that can be written down with
at least some hope of expressing them in the
known universe so 10 the 10 to the 10 the 10
is a huge number it's a huge number so this is a
huge complexity so if a number comes down to this
complexity here it's still going to be in general
very very challenging for us to write down that
number but neveress this is not within the range
of possible expression we might be able to by
creating some huge hard drive that spans galaxies
um at least theoretically think about trying to
express that number in other words write down that
arithmetical expression that actually gives it the
complexity that we're talking about so number that
have complexity in this range are accessible to us
at least theoretically okay practically most
of them are practically there would be a much
smaller line that we have to draw here but we're
being generous here and so theoretically there
would be this band and the reality is that you can
see here at least if things are in the direction
that I'm claiming they are that the vast majority
of numbers are outside this range only every so
often does one of these branches come down and
then there's a little island of accessibility
that's there for us to see like when we have
a number 10 triangle 10 or 10 triangle 10 +
23 we're going to talk more about this because
I want to quantify this I I want to be more
precise about what I'm saying here and not
just have some loose intuition but I I want
to actually make a concrete statement that
will clarify exactly what I'm talking about
here okay and we make it very clear to you
that that what I'm saying is is really quite
accurate in the sense that most numbers
between here and 10 triangle 10 okay are
essentially inaccessible to us and this has
all kinds of ramifications for number theor
for arithmetic for what we think about when we
think about the mathematical world based on the
natural numbers it's really a disconcerting um
destabilizing point of view but it's reality it's
the way the world is the world in which we're
living in so next time we're going to quantify
this kind of behavior we're going to see that
most big numbers are inaccessible to us and that's
going to have all kinds of ramifications going
to force us to examine what actually we mean by
a number it's going to be a consequence of this
investigation so interesting but disconcerting
stuff I hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman
wildberger thanks for listening a [Music]